## Introduction


Hello and welcome to the second half of the semester!  If you can believe it, during a regular term we would be just coming out of the midterm after a week of studying.  Instead we are blazing headfirst towards art of this century. Normally Unit 7 is a lighter load, as this is the week students choose their term paper artists.  If you haven't completed the Discussion Board question in the Term Paper folder, due that now, and take this as an opportunity to work on your papers.

The other part of this unit is getting to know the artists associated with the 80's.  This was a particularly strange time for the arts, as neo-conservatism was in full swing, and America was in love with Ronald Regan.  The arts both suffered and flourished under these conditions. Along with yuppies, the economic boom and a focus on materialism also created record sales in the art world.  At the same time, Neo-conservative attacks on cultural institutions put a stop to the funding of more critical artworks.

The National Endowment for the Arts, which had funded many art projects and allowed artists to create free of commercial constraints, feared funding anything that was the least bit controversial, as critics of the arts questioned if support of culture was at all necessary.  Big businesses, like Marlboro Cigarettes, started funding art as a way to boost their reputation, to take advantage of tax loopholes, and as a way to advertise their names.  ( How many sports arenas can you think of these days that aren't named after a corporation?)  Some artists did not think that money from corporations was the same as societal support however, since it made artists beholden to their corporate sponsors and inhibited freedom of expression.

The 80's saw a mishmash of both retro and innovative styles.  Artists such as *Jenny Holzer*, who we will see again at the end of the course, worked with electronic billboards and text, to find a truly postmodern tech driven conceptual approach to art.  Other artists such as *Jeff Koons* took pop art to new heights, with life sized porcelain statues of celebrities, or himself and his porn-star wife in compromising positions.

Other artists push the social agenda in the arts even further. *Barbara Kruger* and *Cindy Sherman* fused pop art with a critical feminist perspective.  *Kruger* formed posters resembling Soviet propoganda with snappy sayings that critiqued our consumer society and the role of women.  *Sherman* dressed up in elaborate costumes for self portraits that examined female stereotypes. A whole slew of artists, such as *David Wojnarowicz* and *Robert Mapplethorp* examined the AIDS crisis and the unwillingness of the government to do anything about it. 

Not all the arts pushed to the left though, as Family-values oriented politics led to a conflict with those who continued to seek greater equality and rights for women and minorities. The term Neo-Expressionist was used to describe a group of young artists from both America and Europe, who sought to reinvigorate painting at a time when conceptual artwork was dominant. This male dominated group of artists fell into many of the stereotypes of the Ab-Exers: loud, brash, big egos.  This was also accompanied with the materialism of the 80's, with extravagant parties, limos rolling up to galleries, and excessive drugs.  They were known for blatantly appropriating from other painting styles, from German Expressionism to graffiti. One of the more interesting of these artists was *Jean Michele Basquiat*, who began as a musician and graffiti artists before making his way into the art scene. His style fuses bright colors and expressive brush strokes, references to Jazz, African American leaders, and pop culture.
